Add article on the history of scaling in blockchain (#19)
optakt/optakt.github.io: content/knowledge/scalinghistory.md

   Therefore to achieve consensus for a transaction, the node relies on the members in its quorum set. 
   As long as the majority of nodes are not malicious, this will ensure security of the system. 
   Complex web of overlapping quorum slices makes it almost impossible for the majority of nodes to collude to control consensus. 
   FBA can be used on top of PoW or PoS (to be discussed later). 
   Safety and fault tolerance are [preferred over liveness](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aU08km2xrz0&ab_channel=Lumenauts). 
   In case of an accidental fork, the system is halted until consensus is reached. 
   This is important in case of banking applications. 
   Consensus that requires only message passing followed by voting process leads to high transaction volume per second and less expenditure of electricity than PoW.
   However, a criticism of pure FBA is that it leads to fragile structures of constituent nodes, permitting topology scenarios where a single node failure can cause a network-wide failure
   (Resistant to Forks?)

   TODO: Drawback: Single point failure if quorum sets share a single node?

>    (Not mentioning about BFT which require a pre recommended validator list as it is against decentralisation)

Author: Not mentioning about BFT which require a pre recommended validator list as it is against decentralisation

Reviewer: BFT is a family of algorithms used for PoS, not FBA. The first breakthrough paper was PBFT, by a number of improvements on the efficiency:

- Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT): https://pmg.csail.mit.edu/papers/osdi99.pdf
- Friendly Finality Gagdet Casper (FFG Casper): https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.09437.pdf
- Correct By Construction Casper (CBC Casper): https://github.com/cbc-casper/cbc-casper-paper/blob/master/cbc-casper-paper-draft.pdf
- Ouroboros: https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/889.pdf
- Tendermint: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.04938.pdf
- HotStuff: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.05069.pdf

   This can be distributed among the participating nodes in case of a node pool where there are multiple parties participating by delegating their tokens. 
   Two keywords are different here compared to PoW: (1) Computers that participate in PoS consensus are called Validators, (2) Once a block has been created and accepted by the network, it is said to be forged (not mined). 
   Then the validator gets some reward. 
   If a validator tries to be malicious then it gets penalised losing some of its staked cryptocurrency.
   PoS is much faster than PoW as there is no need to solve complex cryptographic puzzles to get to be the block writer and the process is much more streamlined. 
   Also no unnecessary wastage of energy means PoS is more environment friendly.
   The security of the network is ensured by the fact that if an attacker were to attack the system, it needs to have 51% of all the value staked. 
   As opposed to 51% of all computing power in case of a PoW system. 
   Sustainability, security are achieved in a PoS model like the one in ethereum2.0 which is on its way to be released.
   PoS ensures more throughput compared to PoW model. 

>    However there is a communication overhead which hinders scalability (TODO: Explain more). 

Author: How exactly the communication overhead is present in case of PoS? A full mechanism example would be useful as this is not completely clear to me. The example can include the entire process from a user broadcasting a transaction to the validators actually getting rewarded so that the overload of communication can be visualised by the reader.

# A Brief History of Decentralised Scaling

This article will cover how the scaling solutions for decentralised systems in the Crypto world have evolved with regards to the consensus algorithms that have been used, what their problems are and how Flare tries to address them.
We will cover how various blockchains fare in the realm of the [blockchain trilemma](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/07/sharding.html) which roughly states that it is hard to achieve more than 2 ouf 3 from Security, Scalability and Decentralisation.

The concept of Blockchain or Cryptography are not new and have been around before the 2000's.
Still there was no concept of a truly digital currency/value due to the double spending problem.
For example, say I have $100 worth of digital value and I send $100 to both Alice and Bob at the same time.

> There used to be no fully robust way to stop this from happening.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this explanation of the problem is only clear to someone who already knows about it 😄 The way I usually see it described is more about how since it's digital value, nothing prevents you from "copying" it and sending it twice, or something along those lines, but I feel like if we provide an external link it might allow us not even to have to worry about explaining it :) WDYT?

> ## 1. Proof of Work (PoW)

Reviewer 2: I am personally not fond of enumerating sections in markdown technical writing, because it's unnecessary unless we plan on having tons of sections/subsections with numbers like an RFC would for example. Here since it's definitely not the case, I'd suggest removing the numbers :p

   Then came Satoshi Nakamoto who introduced the concept of Proof of Work (PoW) on top of a Blockchain which acts as a distributed ledger of all the transactions of value/currency.
   So now imagine I have 100 Bitcoins.
   There are many machines/nodes which have this information that I have 100 Bitcoins.
   If I send 50 of them to Alice then certain things happen before it gets "finalised".

>    These things include me sending out this transaction info, some number of machines/nodes accepting it (along with transactions from others), verifying that I am truly the one sending it out and then they solve a complicated problem which takes a lot of computing power.

Author: > they will have to get its hash or full data to replace it in their records

This means they will have to restart their calculations by adding the new block's hash in the header right?

   The first one to solve it actually gets to "write" these transactions in the form of a block and that's how it is finalised.

>    A good interactive visualisation of how PoW consensus might work and create a chain of blocks can be found [here](https://youtu.be/_160oMzblY8).

Reviewer 2: This paragraph should not be indented. Also not sure why it's indented by 3 spaces, rather than 2 or 4, that's very strange 😄 

I like the idea of this paragraph but not its implementation. While this would be fine for an article or a blog post, I feel like this is too much storytelling/abstract for technical writing. We should keep our docs very factual IMO and avoid using `I`, `we`, `me`, etc.

> PoW by itself isn’t very new.

Reviewer 2: Also please avoid contractions, like `isn't`, `doesn't`, etc. and prefer the full form: is not, does not. Contractions are meant to be informal and do not belong in technical documents IMO

Reviewer 2: @emailtovamos Unless I am mistaken, this one has not been changed.

```suggestion
PoW by itself is not very new.
```

> Original similar implementation was thought of in 1992 to [combat email spam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashcash).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A similar implementation was thought of in 1992 to [combat email spam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashcash).
```

> So every email will have some form of simple proof of work so that it is easy for me to send email to a friend but gets very hard for a spammer to send millions of emails at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the _Hashcash_ system, every email has some form of simple proof of work, which makes it is easy for someone to send an email to a friend but makes it difficult to send millions of emails at the same time.
```

WDYT?

In theory, PoW can scale infinitely.
But with it comes the extra overhead of computational complexity which may not be practical in a truly global sense.
Also some PoW based blockchains like Ethereum1.0 suffer from huge transaction fees as well as low throughput of 10-15 transactions per second which make them impractical for true global usage.
   Therefore the PoW consensus based blockchains can achieve decentralisation and security but not scalability.

## 2. Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA)

   After Bitcoin and PoW came into picture in 2008, another class of consensus protocols surfaced around 2014 which tried to tackle a different problem known as “Byzantine Generals Problem”.
   This is the problem when there are various nodes communicating with each other and a few of them are “Byzantine” which means either faulty or malicious.
   A good consensus protocol should be able to tackle this issue in a decentralised manner for better security of the network.
   One of the consensus algorithms that manage to do it is called “Federated Byzantine Agreement”.

>    This was introduced by Stellar.

Reviewer: Real FBA was indeed first defined, proven correct and implemented by Stellar. However, Stellar was based on the ideas of Ripple, with a more theory-based approach.

   In FBA, every node has its “quorum set” which is a list of other nodes which this particular node trusts.
   Therefore to achieve consensus for a transaction, the node relies on the members in its quorum set.
   As long as the majority of nodes are not malicious, this will ensure security of the system.

>    Complex web of overlapping quorum slices makes it almost impossible for the majority of nodes to collude to control consensus.

Reviewer: `A complex web`?

>    FBA can be used on top of PoW or PoS (to be discussed later).

Reviewer: PoW does leader selection through mining, while PoS uses a staking set of validators.

FBA is a family of consensus protocols separate from PoW and PoS. They might use some of the same techniques, but it wouldn't be correct to qualify FBA as full PoW or PoS.

   Safety and fault tolerance are [preferred over liveness](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aU08km2xrz0&ab_channel=Lumenauts).
   In case of an accidental fork, the system is halted until consensus is reached.
   This is important in case of banking applications.
   Consensus that requires only message passing followed by voting process leads to high transaction volume per second and less expenditure of electricity than PoW.
   However, a criticism of pure FBA is that it leads to fragile structures of constituent nodes, permitting topology scenarios where a single node failure can cause a network-wide failure.

   TODO: Drawback: Single point failure if quorum sets share a single node?
   (Not mentioning about BFT which require a pre recommended validator list as it is against decentralisation)

## 3. Proof of Stake (PoS)

   Then came the Proof of Stake(PoS) consensus algorithms (e.g. Casper).

>    This no longer needs the computational complexity for validation of blocks but rather how much a node or node pool has staked and how long it has been active.

Reviewer: It's not computational complexity, but computational resources/power. Complexity is a different concept.

   Staking is like putting some native cryptocurrency as a collateral.

>    The higher the stake and time in the game, the higher the chances of getting to write a block on behalf of the whole ecosystem and in return receive some cryptocurrency.

Reviewer: Time in the game is not relevant for most blockchains. You usually have staking periods (epochs). If you want to start validating, to commit a stake; after the epoch changeover, your stake is committed (illiquid) and you can start validating. If you want to stop validating and use your funds, you request unstaking, which usually takes at least one complete epoch as well.

>    This can be distributed among the participating nodes in case of a node pool where there are multiple parties participating by delegating their tokens.

Reviewer: Pools are not really a thing in PoS chains. You might want to talk about mining pool when debating PoW. In PoS chains, users can generally simply "delegate" their tokens to the validators, which is like staking without running your own validator, and adds the weight of the delegated tokens to the staked tokens of the chosen validator, in return for giving part of the reward to the validator.

>    Two keywords are different here compared to PoW: (1) Computers that participate in PoS consensus are called Validators, (2) Once a block has been created and accepted by the network, it is said to be forged (not mined).

Reviewer: I haven't really heard "forged" much, to be honest. One key difference is that a block on a PoS chain has deterministic finality, meaning that once it has been accepted fully, there is no way to ever undo it. In Pow, it can (in theory) always be undone by creating a longer valid chain of blocks.

   Then the validator gets some reward.
   If a validator tries to be malicious then it gets penalised losing some of its staked cryptocurrency.

>    PoS is much faster than PoW as there is no need to solve complex cryptographic puzzles to get to be the block writer and the process is much more streamlined.

Reviewer: It's not much faster. First of all, PoW miners generally use specialized hardware that does only hashing, which is completely useless for any other kind of work, so it wouldn't help with executing transactions or verifying signatures. Second, PoS has a higher communication complexity, so the bottleneck is the network's ability to communicate about the consensus. In PoW, the network just needs to receive a block and can verify it without needing to request anyone's opinion on it, as its implicitly valid if it follows the consensus rules.

Author: Got it. Thanks. So I shouldn't make any statement regarding which one is faster as it will depend on specific cases? Or is it still fair to say `PoS is relatively faster`?

   Also no unnecessary wastage of energy means PoS is more environment friendly.

>    The security of the network is ensured by the fact that if an attacker were to attack the system, it needs to have 51% of all the value staked.

Reviewer: That's not correct. PoS algorithms based on BFT need 2/3+1 of the nodes to be honest, so the required threshold is higher.

   As opposed to 51% of all computing power in case of a PoW system.

>    Sustainability, security are achieved in a PoS model like the one in ethereum2.0 which is on its way to be released.

Reviewer: `Ethereum 2.0`.

Ethereum 2.0 is not just about PoS. It's also about sharding the network. In that sense, it's not a good example for a pure PoS network like, say, Cardano.

>    PoS ensures more throughput compared to PoW model.

Reviewer: Not really, see above. The limitations are on other factors.

>    However there is a communication overhead which hinders scalability (TODO: Explain more).

Author: How exactly the communication overhead is present in case of PoS? A full mechanism example would be useful as this is not completely clear to me. The example can include the entire process from a user broadcasting a transaction to the validators actually getting rewarded so that the overload of communication can be visualised by the reader.

Reviewer: In PoW, I try to find a valid block, where the block hash has a sufficient number of zeros at the front. Once I find that, I just need to include valid transactions that don't conflict with each other, and send the block to the network. Everyone will be able to verify the block's validity implicitly, because it follows the rules. The block production rate is regulated by the difficulty, meaning the number of zeros required in the block hash.

In PoS, agreement on blocks is _explicit_. Even if every consensus rule is followed, a block is not valid. I can send a block following all rules to the network, and it will be rejected because it wasn't signed by a sufficient number of validators. Only after the necessary number of participants to the consensus algorithm explicitly vote for the block by signing it, will it become valid.

This means that a lot of communication is needed. In general, voting on the next correct block requires multiple rounds of communication (prepare, confirm, commit), and the more validators there are, the more overhead there is for everyone to get their messages to the leader of a round.

   Also the higher the adaptation, the higher the overall value represented by the overall native cryptocurrency and therefore higher the value that needs to be locked up as staking by the nodes.
   This means the native currency's full potential isn't utilised as once they are locked, they can no longer be used for any other purposes unless they are unlocked after the locking period expires.

>    Network’s safety is proportional to the value of stake committed.

Reviewer: `Safety` and `security` are two different concepts. In this case, it's the network's `security`. Safety refers to whether the consensus protocol / algorithm executes correctly (no faults are introduced into the state). Security refers to whether the consensus protocol can be broken.

## 3.1 Sharding and layer 2 solutions

>    For solving this scaling issue, 'sharding' is introduced(e.g. In case of [Ethereum2.0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctzGr58_jeI&t=657s&ab_channel=Finematics).

Reviewer: `Ethereum 2.0`.

Reviewer: `introduced (e.g. in the case of...`

   Sharding is a way of spreading the computing and storage workload from a blockchain network, so that each node no longer has to process the entire network's transactional load.
   Each node only needs to maintain info corresponding to its specific shard or partition.

>    For example, addresses starting with “0x00” will be part of Shard1 and addresses starting with “0x01” will be part of Shard2 etc.

Reviewer: We can just use `shard 1` and `shard 2` here.

   There is a mechanism in place for inter-shard communication so that the whole blockchain is still viewable from any node.
   All the shards will be connected to the “Beacon chain” which will have all the history with it and acts as an orchestrator of the whole network.

>    The consensus between all the shards will be maintained by the Beacon chain.

Reviewer: I would prefer to use **a** "beacon chain" here, because it's not the only way to shard a network.

   However sharding has its own challenges.
   Corrupting nodes in a given shard may lead to permanent loss of data.
   One way to tackle this issue is by randomly assigning a node to a shard and randomly reassigning the node to another shard.

>    Sharding has another problem that the composability aspect of Smart contract compatible blockchain will no longer exist.

Reviewer: `smart contract`.

>    For example, if a Defi built on top of Ethereum1.0 ecosystem relies on or combines few other projects, then in a sharded system of Ethereum2.0, ideally they should be on the same shard which may not always be the case.

Reviewer: _"if a Defi built on top"_ doesn't really make sense here.

`if a Decentralized Finance (DeFi) platform built on top of Ethereum relies on...`

   If they are not on the same shard then they all needs to be ok with asynchronous updates which is [not ideal](https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2020/10/13/will-a-sharded-ethereum-be-flexible-enough-for-decentralized-finance/).

> ## 4. Avalanche

Reviewer: Avalanche is a leaderless protocol, which I think deserves some extra mention. It's really the first one of its kind. In BFT PoS, there is a leader for every round that has to propose the block; in Avalanche, everyone can propose state changes concurrently.

>    The next level solution for scalability in terms of consensus algorithms is by Avalanche network.

Author: The second one.

>    The next level solution for scalability in terms of consensus algorithms is by Avalanche network.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I meant it is not clear from the text. It would better to say "The next level solution for scalability in terms of consensus algorithms is by Avalanche consensus"
because Avalanche network points to the application

>    The next level solution for scalability in terms of consensus algorithms is by Avalanche network.

Reviewer 3: IMO it should be "The next level solution for scalability in terms of consensus algorithms is by Avalanche consensus which uses Snow Algorithm with PoS as the underlying [sybil control mechanism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack)."

>    In Avalanche, the underlying [sybil control mechanism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack) is still PoS but there is a different mechanism in place to finalise validating transactions.

Reviewer: PoS is always just there to prevent sybil attacks. It only defines the set of validators. Then there is a consensus algorithm. Avalanche is essentially still PoS. Might be better to use different terms for the sections:

1. Nakamoto Consensus
2. Federated Byzantine Agreement
3. Byzantine Fault Tolerance
4. Snow Consensus

   This is achieved by a particular node randomly subsampling from other nodes multiple times across multiple cycles and eventually arriving at a consensus.

>    This is then recorded in a Directed Acyclic Graph as opposed to a chain of Blocks.

Reviewer: Can add `(DAG)` here, and use `blocks`.

>    This is then recorded in a Directed Acyclic Graph as opposed to a chain of Blocks.

Author: Thanks for the descriptive details! 
Is there anything specific you wanted this part to include or like a link to another article which explains in more detail if a reader wants to read?

>    This is then recorded in a Directed Acyclic Graph as opposed to a chain of Blocks.

Reviewer 3: The idea is not to compare directly the DAG with the chain of blocks because they are different things.
You can compare the "correct" path from the DAG with the chain of blocks
OR
The way that DAG network tracks history of transactions in the DAG tree, in which there is one correct path, etc... with the way that blockchain networks do not keep such a history in any structure, but only the selected path exists as a chain of blocks.
It could become something like:
"This is then recorded in a Directed Acyclic Graph as opposed to networks that work with only a chain of Blocks and no structure for the transaction history."
WDYT?

>    This consensus can easily scale at a much higher level compared to Bitcoin/PoW or Ethereum2.0/PoS because of faster agreement of transactions.

Reviewer: Scale _to_ a higher level. Because the communicational complexity is much lower than BFT; we only need to communicate with random sub-samples of the network for each round. If these are logarithmically smaller than the entire set of validators on the network, the performance doesn't decrease exponentially with the size of the validator set.

>    The issue with Avalanche is similar to what other PoS based networks also have i.e. the economic limit of having a lot of value locked as stake in order to have the PoS running which may not be practical when the network overall value is in trillions of dollars.

Reviewer: I would say this differently:

```
However, one common issue for PoS blockchains remains: the security of the network depends on the ratio of capital locked up for validation.
```

>    The minimum staking that is required to become a validator may not be easy for an average person to be a validator without delegating to another validator thereby contributing to centralisation of the network.

Reviewer: While that's a valid point, it's a separate point and should not be given as a logical follow-up from the previous one.

   Thus Avalanche has validators only in the number of thousands and not tens or hundreds of thousands so far.
   Usually many PoS based networks impose a penalty for malicious validators or validators that aren’t online continuously by slashing which is taking away some of the staked tokens as a punishment.

>    Avalanche doesn’t have this mechanism to encourage more participation as a step towards more decentralisation thereby sacrificing a bit more of security.

Reviewer: Actually, Avalanche nodes monitor uptime and nodes don't receive rewards when they are not up long enough.

   (Doubt: How the rich get richer compounding effect is absent in Avalanche?)
   (Doubt: How exactly the transactions get written after consensus and how reward distribution happens in Avalanche?)

## 5. Flare

>    Flare network combines best of both worlds by making Avalanche more resistant to Sybil attacks by introducing FBA into it.

Reviewer: I don't think it's more robust to Sybil attacks. Why would Avalanche be vulnerable to that?

   Flare’s FBA achieves safety without relying too much on economic incentives that can interfere with high-value use cases.
   In Flare, each node has its own local set of validators or quorum set also known as Unique Node List (UNL).
   This varies from the usual FBA because of another requirement that there should be a minimum level of overlap between UNLs.
   This makes the network more single node failure resistant as well as Sybil attack resistant.
   This is because a malicious actor is unlikely to be able to spin up many node instances that will also make it to the UNL list of other existing quorum sets.
   The native token, Spark, can be used to delegate to the price providers for FTSO (link to FTSO article) without having any locking thereby enabling other usage of Spark at the same time.

>    There is no hard link between the safety of the network and the value of native token Spark which allows greater flexibility for how Spark can be used.

Reviewer: I don't think section has a clear narrative to follow. It's a bit a mix of everything, without clear sequence to the explanation. Needs a bit more work.

   (TODO: What is the incentive to become a [validator in Flare](https://www.thedefistandard.com/flare-network/state-connector-system/)?

Flare’s overall vision is to achieve a truly global network that is:

* Decentralised (Not present in Fiat)
* Scalable (Not present in Bitcoin/Ethereum)
* Secure
* Resistant to Sybil Attack (Only present in current PoS systems where there is reliance on economic incentives for safety)
* Trustless (Not present in Fiat)
* Interoperable

> * Composable

Reviewer: I'm not really sure about this. The conclusion should follow from how Flare improves on previous projects; not suddenly suggest a lot of other things. So this document doesn't really need to talk about the total Flare vision; just about the characteristics as they relate to scaling, and where Flare positions itself there.

Below is a summary of characteristics of various distributed networks:

> | Crypto Project  | Decentralisation  |Security   |  Scalability |Energy Efficient   |Composability   | Throughput  |
> |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
> |Bitcoin(PoW)   | ✅  | ✅  | ❌  |❌   | ❌  | ❌  |
> |Ethereum(PoW)   | ✅  | ✅  | ❌  | ❌  | ✅  | ❌  |
> |Eth2.0(PoS+Sharding)   |✅   |✅   |✅   |✅   | ❌  | ✅  |
> |Avalanche(PoS)   | ✅  | ✅  | ❌  | ✅  |✅   |✅   |
> |Flare(Ava+FBA+UNL)   | ✅  |✅   | ✅  | ✅  |✅   | ✅  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Crypto Project       | Decentralisation | Security | Scalability | Energy Efficient | Composability | Throughput |
|----------------------|------------------|----------|-------------|------------------|---------------|------------|
| Bitcoin(PoW)         | ✅                | ✅        | ❌           | ❌                | ❌             | ❌          |
| Ethereum(PoW)        | ✅                | ✅        | ❌           | ❌                | ✅             | ❌          |
| Eth2.0(PoS+Sharding) | ✅                | ✅        | ✅           | ✅                | ❌             | ✅          |
| Avalanche(PoS)       | ✅                | ✅        | ❌           | ✅                | ✅             | ✅          |
| Flare(Ava+FBA+UNL)   | ✅                | ✅        | ✅           | ✅                | ✅             | ✅          |
```

Use [markdowntable.com](http://markdowntable.com/) to format markdown tables, this makes them more maintainable

# A Brief History of Decentralised Scaling

This article covers how the scaling solutions for decentralized systems in the crypto world have evolved with regards to the consensus algorithms that have been used, what their problems are and how Flare tries to address them.
It also addresses how various blockchains fare in the realm of the [blockchain trilemma](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/07/sharding.html) which roughly states that it is hard to achieve more than 2 ouf 3 from security, scalability and decentralization.

The concepts at the foundation of blockchain technology, such as cryptography (for data encryption) and peer-to-peer networks (that handle distributed information being exchanged between the participants) were around before the 2000s.
However, there was no concept of a truly digital currency due to the [double spending problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-spending).

> For example, say Brian has $100 worth of digital value, and Brian sends $100 to both Alice and Bob at the same time.
> There used to be no fully robust way to determine which one of the two transactions is the valid one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

My previous suggestion involved not only adding a link, but also avoiding examples like this one, since I feel like they are not making the document clearer IMO.

Author: Just to understand, is the example not representative of what an actual double spending problem may look like?
 
My main reason to add it was so that a beginner reader will understand the basic issue without actually having to go through the given external link. But if this example isn't making the idea clearer then I am happy to remove it. :slightly_smiling_face:

Nodes collect pending transactions (sent out by wallet applications) in a memory pool.
When a node solves the computational problem, it gets to pick the transactions from its memory pool that get included in the next block and thus become part of the consensus state.
However, only under the condition that the block follows the rules on transaction validity, i.e. does not include any transactions spending the same unit of account twice.
This is termed as "Nakamoto consensus".
A good interactive visualisation of how PoW consensus might work and create a chain of blocks can be found [here](https://youtu.be/_160oMzblY8).

PoW by itself isn’t very new.
A similar implementation was thought of in 1992 to [combat email spam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashcash).
In that use case using the Hashcash system, every email has some form of simple proof of work, which makes it is easy for someone to send an email to a friend but makes it difficult for a spammer to send millions of emails at the same time.

In theory, PoW can scale infinitely.
The more successful the network is, the higher the demand for the token.

> The higher the demand for the token, the more the price will increase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The higher the demand for the token, the more its value increases.
```

As the price increases, more miners are able to profitably run miners, and more power is wasted.
Also, some PoW based blockchains like Ethereum suffer from huge transaction fees as well as low throughput of 10-15 transactions per second which make them impractical for true global usage.
Bitcoin's PoW has the potential to scale a lot in terms of payment system; but the wastage of energy is its biggest problem.

## Federated Byzantine Agreement

> [Byzantine Generals Problem](https://bravenewgeek.com/tag/byzantine-generals-problem/) is the problem when there are various nodes communicating with each other and a few of them are “Byzantine” which means either faulty or malicious.
> This means some of the nodes may send out messages which contain deliberately wrong information.
> In the context of blockchain that would concern false signatures, double spent transactions, not replying to messages, etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Byzantine Generals Problem](https://bravenewgeek.com/tag/byzantine-generals-problem/) is a problem when there are various nodes communicating and a few of them are “Byzantine” — either faulty or malicious.
Byzantine nodes might not reply to messages, or deliberately send wrong information like false signatures, double spent transactions, etc..
```

Therefore, any blockchain should have mechanisms to solve the Byzantine Generals Problem.
In case of Bitcoin, the mechanism is PoW.
Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA) consensus in a family of consensus protocols, which eliminates Byzantine faults, and provides deterministic finality (unlike PoW which has only probabilistic finality), without having the selection of validators as part of the protocol itself.
This was introduced by Stellar.
In FBA, every node has its “quorum set” which is a list of other nodes which this particular node trusts.
Therefore, to achieve consensus for a transaction, the node relies on the members in its quorum set.

> As long as the majority of nodes are not malicious, this will ensure security of the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As long as the majority of nodes are not malicious, this ensures security of the system.
```

This is important in banking applications.
A consensus that requires only message exchanging followed by voting process leads to high messages volume per second and less expenditure of electricity than PoW.
However, a criticism of pure FBA is that it leads to fragile structures of constituent nodes, permitting topology scenarios where a single node failure can cause a network-wide failure.
For example, [in November 2021](https://u.today/xrp-ledger-is-back-on-track-after-temporary-halt), four validators in Ripple went down which halted the whole network for 15 minutes because consensus could not longer be reached.

## Proof of Stake

Then came the [Proof of Stake](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-stake-pos.asp) (PoS) consensus algorithms (e.g. Casper).
This type no longer needs the computational power used for blocks validating but rather an amount staked by network participants (being single or in clusters).
Staking is putting some native cryptocurrency as a collateral in order to become a validating entity in the network.
The higher the stake, the higher the chances of getting to write a block on behalf of the whole ecosystem and in return receive some cryptocurrency.

> Two keywords are different here compared to PoW: (1) Computers that participate in PoS consensus are called Validators, (2) Once a block has been created and accepted by the network, it is said to be forged (not mined).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two keywords are different here compared to PoW: computers that participate in PoS consensus are called _validators_, and once a block has been created and accepted by the network, it is said to be _forged_ (not mined).
```

Then the validator gets some reward.
If a user does not want to run his own validator, then he can generally simply "delegate" his tokens to the validators, which is like staking without running his own validator, and add the weight of the delegated tokens to the staked tokens of the chosen validator, in return for giving part of the reward to the validator.
If a validator tries to be malicious then it gets penalised losing some of its staked cryptocurrency.

One key difference between PoS and PoW is that a block on a PoS chain has deterministic finality, meaning that once it has been accepted fully, there is no way to ever undo it.

> In Pow, it can (in theory) always be undone by creating a longer valid chain of blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Pow, it can theoretically always be undone by creating a longer valid chain of blocks.
```

Reviewer 4: Also the 'W' in `PoW` should be capitalized.

PoS is relatively faster than PoW as there is no need to solve complex cryptographic puzzles to get to be the block writer and the process is much more streamlined.
Also no unnecessary wastage of energy means PoS is more environment friendly.
PoS algorithms based on BFT need 2/3+1 of the nodes to be honest, so the required threshold is higher than PoW where an attacker needs 51% of all computing power.
Sustainability, security are achieved in a PoS model like the one in Cardano.
In PoS, explicit agreement is required before a block becomes valid.

> If a sufficient number of validators do not sign the block then it will be rejected even if all consensus rule is followed by the block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a sufficient number of validators do not sign the block, it gets rejected, even if all consensus rule is followed by the block.
```

Also, I'm not sure what you mean by:

> even if all consensus rule is followed by the block

Author: What I meant to say is that even if it is a valid block without any malicious behaviour etc, it still needs to wait for signature from a good number of validators.

> Only after the necessary number of participants to the consensus algorithm explicitly vote for the block by signing it, will it become valid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only after the necessary number of participants to the consensus algorithm explicitly vote for the block by signing it, does it become valid.
```

This means that a lot of communication is needed.
In general, voting on the next correct block requires multiple rounds of communication (preparation round, confirmation round and commit round), and the more validators there are, the more overhead there is for everyone to get their messages to the leader of a round.
Due to this high number of communication scalability is hindered.

> Also the higher the adaptation, the higher the total value represented by the native cryptocurrency and therefore higher the value that needs to be locked up as staking by the nodes.

Reviewer 4: I'm confused by this - "the higher the adaption"? What adaptation is this?

Author: Adaptation by community in general when the particular cryptocurrency gets more popular.

Reviewer 4: Ah, do you mean adoption?

This means the native currency's full potential is not utilised as once they are locked, they can no longer be used for any other purposes unless they are unlocked after the locking period expires.
Network’s security is proportional to the value of stake committed.

> ## Sharding and layer 2 solutions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Sharding and Layer 2 Solutions
```

For solving this scaling issue, 'sharding' is introduced (e.g. in the case of [Ethereum 2.0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctzGr58_jeI&t=657s&ab_channel=Finematics)).
Sharding is a way of spreading the computing and storage workload from a blockchain network, so that each node no longer has to process the entire network's transactional load.
Each node only needs to maintain info corresponding to its specific shard or partition.

> For example, addresses starting with “0x00” will be part of shard 1 and addresses starting with “0x01” will be part of shard 2 etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, addresses starting with “0x00” are part of shard 1 and addresses starting with “0x01” are part of shard 2 etc.
```

There is a mechanism in place for inter-shard communication so that the whole blockchain is still viewable from any node.

> All the shards will be connected to the “Beacon chain” which will have all the history with it and acts as an orchestrator of the whole network.
> The consensus between all the shards will be maintained by a "beacon chain".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the shards are connected to the “Beacon chain” which has access to all the chain's history and acts as an orchestrator of the whole network.
The consensus between all the shards is maintained by a "beacon chain".
```

However, sharding has its own challenges.
Corrupting nodes in a given shard may lead to permanent loss of data.
One way to tackle this issue is by randomly assigning a node to a shard and randomly reassigning the node to another shard.

> Sharding has another problem that the composability aspect of smart contract compatible blockchain will no longer exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sharding has another problem: smart contract compatible blockchains are no longer composable.
```

WDYT?

> For example, if a Decentralized Finance (DeFi) platform built on top of Ethereum relies on relies on or combines few other projects, then in a sharded system of Ethereum2.0, ideally they should be on the same shard which may not always be the case.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, if a Decentralized Finance (DeFi) platform built on top of Ethereum relies on or combines few other projects, then in a sharded system of Ethereum 2.0, ideally they should be on the same shard which may not always be the case.
```

> If they are not on the same shard then they all needs to be ok with asynchronous updates which is [not ideal](https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2020/10/13/will-a-sharded-ethereum-be-flexible-enough-for-decentralized-finance/).

Reviewer 4: Phrasing it like "they all need to be ok with asynchronous updates" is a bit weird, and informal. I lack a little context here, but perhaps something like "they all need to support asynchronous updates" might fit better. WDYT?

## Avalanche

The next level solution for scalability in terms of consensus algorithms is by Avalanche network which uses Snow Consensus with PoS as the underlying [sybil control mechanism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack).
In Snow consensus, in short, a particular node randomly sub-samples from other nodes multiple times across multiple cycles and eventually arrives at a consensus.
This is then recorded in a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) as opposed to a chain of blocks.
Every node has its own view of the current consensus state; they do not progress in lock-step like they do for BFT algorithms.
However, the local view of each node is eventually consistent with the view of all other nodes on the network.

Snow consensus can easily scale to a higher level compared to PoW or PoS.

> Because the communicational complexity is much lower than BFT; we only need to communicate with random sub-samples of the network for each round.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if I understood this correctly.. If I guessed right, perhaps this is better phrased:

```suggestion
Because the nodes only need to communicate with random sub-samples of the network for each round, the communicational complexity is much lower than BFT.
```

If these are logarithmically smaller than the entire set of validators on the network, the performance does not decrease exponentially with the size of the validator set.
However, one common issue for PoS blockchains remains: the security of the network depends on the ratio of capital locked up for validation.
Usually many PoS based networks impose a penalty for malicious validators or validators that aren’t online continuously by slashing which is taking away some of the staked tokens as a punishment.
In case of Snow consensus, nodes monitor uptime and nodes do not receive rewards when they are not up long enough.

Avalanche is a leaderless protocol, which is the first one of its kind.
In BFT PoS, there is a leader for every round that has to propose the block; in Avalanche, everyone can propose state changes concurrently.

## Flare

Flare network combines best of both worlds by introducing FBA into the Snow consensus of Avalanche.
Flare’s FBA achieves safety without relying too much on economic incentives that can interfere with high-value use cases.
In Flare, each node has its own local set of validators or quorum set also known as Unique Node List (UNL).

> This varies from the usual FBA because of another requirement that there should be a minimum level of overlap between UNLs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An added requirement compared to the usual FBA is that there should be a minimum level of overlap between UNLs.
```

Also I'm not completely clear on this - is the requirement that there should be as little overlap as possible, or that there is some overlap? I kinda assume the first one..

> This makes the network more single node failure resistant as well as Sybil attack resistant.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This makes the network more resistant to single node failure as well as Sybil attack resistant.
```

> This is because a malicious actor is unlikely to be able to spin up many node instances that will also make it to the UNL list of other existing quorum sets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because a malicious actor is unlikely to be able to spin up many node instances that manage to integrate the UNL list of other existing quorum sets.
```

> The native token, Spark, can be used to delegate to the price providers for FTSO (link to FTSO article) without having any locking thereby enabling other usage of Spark at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The native token, Spark, is used to delegate to the price providers for [FTSO](https://flare.xyz/ftso-a-breakdown/) without having any locking thereby enabling other usage of Spark at the same time.
```

Also, if this is the first time we mention the FTSO, we should not call it FTSO but `Flare Time Series Oracle (FTSO)` and only refer to it as FTSO from then on.

There is no hard link between the safety of the network and the value of native token Spark which allows greater flexibility for how Spark can be used.

In Flare, there are two sets of validators:

> * the local set of validators that we rely on for consensus;
> * the set of underlying chain validators/miners, that can propose blocks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* the local set of validators that we rely on for consensus
* the set of underlying chain validators/miners, that can propose blocks
```

> When someone proposes a block, they do receive a reward.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When someone proposes a block, they receive a reward.
```

> These sets can overlap.

Reviewer 4: This feels out of place here. Perhaps it can be added to the first sentence above, like: _In Flare, there are two potentially overlapping sets of validators:_

Or perhaps the part about rewards for block proposals can be squeezed into the second bullet point.

> However, someone running a price provider or a proof attestor also needs to run a node, so there will be many more nodes than just the underlying chain validators/miners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, someone running a price provider or a proof attestor also needs to run a node, which results in many more nodes than just the underlying chain validators/miners.
```

# A Brief History of Decentralised Scaling

This article covers how the scaling solutions for decentralized systems in the crypto world have evolved with regards to the consensus algorithms that have been used, what their problems are and how Flare tries to address them.
It also addresses how various blockchains fare in the realm of the [blockchain trilemma](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/07/sharding.html) which roughly states that it is hard to achieve more than 2 out of 3 from security, scalability and decentralization.

> The concepts at the foundation of blockchain technology, such as cryptography (for data encryption) and peer-to-peer networks (that handle distributed information being exchanged between the participants) were around before the 2000s.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The concepts at the foundation of blockchain technology, such as cryptography (for data encryption) and peer-to-peer networks (that handle information exchange in a distributed way) were around before the 2000s.
```

In Snow consensus, in short, a particular node randomly sub-samples from other nodes multiple times across multiple cycles and eventually arrives at a consensus.
This is then recorded in a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) as opposed to a chain of blocks.
Every node has its own view of the current consensus state; they do not progress in lock-step as they do for BFT algorithms.
However, the local view of each node is eventually consistent with the view of all other nodes on the network.

Snow consensus can easily scale to a higher level compared to PoW or PoS.
Because the nodes only need to communicate with random sub-samples of the network for each round, the communicational complexity is much lower than BFT.
If these are logarithmically smaller than the entire set of validators on the network, the performance does not decrease exponentially with the size of the validator set.
However, one common issue for PoS blockchains remains: the security of the network depends on the ratio of capital locked up for validation.

> Usually many PoS based networks impose a penalty for malicious validators or validators that aren’t online continuously by slashing which is taking away some of the staked tokens as a punishment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Usually many PoS based networks impose a penalty for malicious validators or validators that are not online continuously by slashing which is taking away some of the staked tokens as a punishment.
```

   In FBA, every node has its “quorum set” which is a list of other nodes which this particular node trusts. Therefore to achieve consensus for a transaction, the node relies on the members in its quorum set. As long as the majority of nodes are not malicious, this will ensure security of the system. Complex web of overlapping quorum slices makes it almost impossible for the majority of nodes to collude to control consensus. FBA can be used on top of PoW or PoS (to be discussed later). Safety and fault tolerance are [preferred over liveness](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aU08km2xrz0&ab_channel=Lumenauts). In case of an accidental fork, the system is halted until consensus is reached. This is important in case of banking applications. Consensus that requires only message passing followed by voting process leads to high transaction volume per second and less expenditure of electricity than PoW.
   However, a criticism of pure FBA is that it leads to fragile structures of constituent nodes, permitting topology scenarios where a single node failure can cause a network-wide failure
   (Resistant to Forks?)

>    TODO: Drawback: Single point failure if quorum sets share a single node?

Author: Is Single point failure if quorum sets share a single node possible in case of Stellar FBA? I know in pure FBA this can be a problem which is why UNL with adjustable parameters are introduced in Flare.

Reviewer: Yes, this is exactly what you are introducing earlier: safety and fault tolerance are preferred over liveness. When a network partition happens, maybe because the only node in common between two big sets of nodes goes down, the smaller partition will no longer be live, i.e. it won't make progress. If no partition is big enough to achieve consensus, the whole network will halt. This happened for Ripple twice in the last couple of months.

   PoS is much faster than PoW as there is no need to solve complex cryptographic puzzles to get to be the block writer and the process is much more streamlined. Also no unnecessary wastage of energy means PoS is more environment friendly.
   The security of the network is ensured by the fact that if an attacker were to attack the system, it needs to have 51% of all the value staked. As opposed to 51% of all computing power in case of a PoW system. Sustainability, security are achieved in a PoS model like the one in ethereum2.0 which is on its way to be released.

>    PoS ensures more throughput compared to PoW model. However there is a communication overhead which hinders scalability (TODO: Explain more). Also the higher the adaptation, the higher the overall value represented by the overall native cryptocurrency and therefore higher the value that needs to be locked up as staking by the nodes. This means the native currency's full potential isn't utilised as once they are locked, they can no longer be used for any other purposes unless they are unlocked after the locking period expires. Network’s safety is proportional to the value of stake committed.

Author: How exactly the communication overhead is present in case of PoS? A full mechanism example would be useful as this is not completely clear to me. The example can include the entire process from a user broadcasting a transaction to the validators actually getting rewarded so that the overload of communication can be visualised by the reader.

   The issue with Avalanche is similar to what other PoS based networks also have i.e. the economic limit of having a lot of value locked as stake in order to have the PoS running which may not be practical when the network overall value is in trillions of dollars. The minimum staking that is required to become a validator may not be easy for an average person to be a validator without delegating to another validator thereby contributing to centralisation of the network. Thus Avalanche has validators only in the number of thousands and not tens or hundreds of thousands so far.
   Usually many PoS based networks impose a penalty for malicious validators or validators that aren’t online continuously by slashing which is taking away some of the staked tokens as a punishment. Avalanche doesn’t have this mechanism to encourage more participation as a step towards more decentralisation thereby sacrificing a bit more of security.

>    (Doubt: How the rich get richer compounding effect is absent in Avalanche?)

Author: How the rich get richer compounding effect is absent in Avalanche? Since bigger validators will have higher chance of reward?

Reviewer: I don't think that was ever a stated goal of any project. Why do you bring it up?

It's definitely something worth talking about, and many people have, but it's not within the scope of this document.

>    (Doubt: How exactly the transactions get written after consensus and how reward distribution happens in Avalanche?)

Reviewer: Every node has its own view of the current consensus state; they don't progress in lock-step like they do for BFT algorithms. However, the local view of each node is eventually consistent with the view of all other nodes on the network.

## 5. Flare

   Flare network combines best of both worlds by making Avalanche more resistant to Sybil attacks by introducing FBA into it. Flare’s FBA achieves safety without relying too much on economic incentives that can interfere with high-value use cases.
   In Flare, each node has its own local set of validators or quorum set also known as Unique Node List (UNL). This varies from the usual FBA because of another requirement that there should be a minimum level of overlap between UNLs. This makes the network more single node failure resistant as well as Sybil attack resistant. This is because a malicious actor is unlikely to be able to spin up many node instances that will also make it to the UNL list of other existing quorum sets.
   The native token, Spark, can be used to delegate to the price providers for FTSO (link to FTSO article) without having any locking thereby enabling other usage of Spark at the same time. There is no hard link between the safety of the network and the value of native token Spark which allows greater flexibility for how Spark can be used.

>    (TODO: What is the incentive to become a [validator in Flare](https://www.thedefistandard.com/flare-network/state-connector-system/)?

Author: What is the incentive to become a validator in Flare? As most rewards goes to Agents or FTSO data providers.

Reviewer: There are two sets of validators:

- the local set of validators that we rely on for consensus;
- the set of underlying chain validators/miners, that can propose blocks.

When someone proposes a block, they do receive a reward. These sets can definitely overlap. However, someone running a price provider or a proof attestor also needs to run a node, so there will be many more nodes than just the underlying chain validators/miners.
